For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
As every alien pen hath got my use
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
Making no summer of another's green,
It is the star to every wandering bark,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?
What old December's bareness every where!
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
Though to itself it only live and die,
So far from variation or quick change?
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
O, call not me to justify the wrong
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove
Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
Creating every bad a perfect best,
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm'd.
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:
Since why to love I can allege no cause.
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
All losses are restored and sorrows end.
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Or say with princes if it shall go well,
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Our love was new and then but in the spring
A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross'd.
But, for their virtue only is their show,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
Among a number one is reckon'd none:
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends
That he shall never cut from memory
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.
To do more for me than mine own desert,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
And with his presence grace impiety,
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
O, let my books be then the eloquence
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
For never-resting time leads summer on
For no man well of such a salve can speak
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
And all in war with Time for love of you,
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
When in the chronicle of wasted time
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:
if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
No news but health from their physicians know;
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
For to no other pass my verses tend
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
Of bird of flower, or shape, which it doth latch:
If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
So is it not with me as with that Muse
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
They are but dressings of a former sight.
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
And threescore year would make the world away.
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
Mine appetite I never more will grind
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die.
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
The barren tender of a poet's debt;
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
To tie up envy evermore enlarged:
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd;
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue:
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
How can I then be elder than thou art?
As with your shadow I with these did play:
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
And then thou lovest me, for my name is 'Will.'
But let your love even with my life decay,
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
Shall reasons find of settled gravity,--
So, either by thy picture or my love,
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast
Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
That all the world besides methinks are dead.
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains.
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
Receiving nought by elements so slow
And all those friends which I thought buried.
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Harsh featureless and rude, barrenly perish:
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,
Be scorn'd like old men of less truth than tongue,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
Thy unused beauty must be tomb'd with thee,
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
To be so tickled, they would change their state
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
So true a fool is love that in your will,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot
The forward violet thus did I chide:
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
To make of monsters and things indigest
And in this change is my invention spent,
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
Your love and pity doth the impression fill
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
In other accents do this praise confound
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
And my sick Muse doth give another place.
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain;
Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason;
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found;
They that have power to hurt and will do none,
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;
I have no precious time at all to spend,
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For thee and for myself no quiet find.
And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim
But sad mortality o'er-sways their power,
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
