Made old offences of affections new;
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
'Will' will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Suspect I may, but not directly tell;
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
And in abundance addeth to his store;
Since mind at first in character was done!
Save that my soul's imaginary sight
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;
To follow that which flies before her face,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.
And by addition me of thee defeated,
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
And then thou lovest me, for my name is 'Will.'
Of more delight than hawks or horses be;
O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch
You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.
Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing,
Thou hast pass'd by the ambush of young days,
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains.
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
This I do vow and this shall ever be;
Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
And therefore have I slept in your report,
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
Now is the time that face should form another;
You are my all the world, and I must strive
Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy?
Which three till now never kept seat in one.
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
To thee I send this written embassage,
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes--
Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
At my abuses reckon up their own:
Because I would not dull you with my song.
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Leaving thee living in posterity?
Receiving nought by elements so slow
And lace itself with his society?
But the defendant doth that plea deny
O' let me, true in love, but truly write,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will,'
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force,
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
For nothing this wide universe I call,
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
So that myself bring water for my stain.
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?
The sea all water, yet receives rain still
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
I send them back again and straight grow sad.
Of bird of flower, or shape, which it doth latch:
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
All this away and me most wretched make.
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
For why should others false adulterate eyes
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured
Much steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
The worth of that is that which it contains,
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
To swear against the truth so foul a lie!
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
The mountain or the sea, the day or night,
That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?
There is such strength and warrantize of skill
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
When all the breathers of this world are dead;
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
Unlook'd on diest, unless thou get a son.
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
This were to be new made when thou art old,
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan
And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
If thou survive my well-contented day,
Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.
For it no form delivers to the heart
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-kill'd.
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
To me that languish'd for her sake;
To be so tickled, they would change their state
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
That he shall never cut from memory
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And mock you with me after I am gone.
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
Speak of the spring and foison of the year;
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
For she hath no excheckr now but his,
Against that time, if ever that time come,
One on another's neck, do witness bear
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight,
Look, what is best, that best I wish in thee:
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st;
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Thou canst not then use rigor in my gaol:
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
The argument all bare is of more worth
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
Be scorn'd like old men of less truth than tongue,
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And on just proof surmise accumulate;
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
For at a frown they in their glory die.
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks
The little Love-god lying once asleep
But day by night, and night by day, oppress'd?
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
Each changing place with that which goes before,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
From thy behavior; beauty doth he give
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay,
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
When thou art all the better part of me?
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
But sad mortality o'er-sways their power,
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
Admit impediments. Love is not love
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
The other two, slight air and purging fire,
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
The fairest votary took up that fire
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
O, never say that I was false of heart,
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
Or else receivest with pleasure thine annoy?
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
On both sides thus is simple truth suppress'd.
Therefore my mistress' brows are raven black,
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
And her quietus is to render thee.
Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
O, let it then as well beseem thy heart
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
Will play the tyrants to the very same
To keep an adjunct to remember thee
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
No longer yours than you yourself here live:
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
That's for thyself to breed another thee,
I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
But in the onset come; so shall I taste
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents
I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
By children's eyes her husband's shape in mind.
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Or whether revolution be the same.
Those lips that Love's own hand did make
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be,
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold
That am debarr'd the benefit of rest?
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
So true a fool is love that in your will,
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus;
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
Against this coming end you should prepare,
I have no precious time at all to spend,
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
Without all bail shall carry me away,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
So, love, be thou; although to-day thou fill
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest.
And I by this will be a gainer too;
Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
Yet, do thy worst, old Time: despite thy wrong,
Will sourly leave her till she have prevailed?
Is lust in action; and till action, lust
But that wild music burthens every bough
Save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
O, let my books be then the eloquence
How heavy do I journey on the way,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
What means the world to say it is not so?
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
But being both from me, both to each friend,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
If all were minded so, the times should cease
Sings this to thee: 'thou single wilt prove none.'
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
And made myself a motley to the view,
As an unperfect actor on the stage
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon,
Slandering creation with a false esteem:
And to the most of praise add something more;
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.
And all in war with Time for love of you,
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
Calls back the lovely April of her prime:
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
The injuries that to myself I do,
A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made:
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
Without all ornament, itself and true,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
For thou art covetous and he is kind;
Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
Till I return, of posting is no need.
How like a winter hath my absence been
In many's looks the false heart's history
My saucy bark inferior far to his
That it could so preposterously be stain'd,
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you?
O, blame me not, if I no more can write!
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
The world will wail thee, like a makeless wife;
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love.'
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd'
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
For we, which now behold these present days,
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade,
Then what could death do, if thou shouldst depart,
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
To truths translated and for true things deem'd.
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
To march in ranks of better equipage:
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
Since all alike my songs and praises be
Fairing the foul with art's false borrow'd face,
To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,
Who with his fear is put besides his part,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Where I may not remove nor be removed.
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:
When other petty griefs have done their spite
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Though to itself it only live and die,
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
O, though I love what others do abhor,
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
And sable curls all silver'd o'er with white;
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was:
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
And you and love are still my argument;
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
But, for their virtue only is their show,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
Are vanishing or vanish'd out of sight,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
Too base of thee to be remembered.
Full character'd with lasting memory,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
No, I am that I am, and they that level
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;
So shall those blots that do with me remain
Love is too young to know what conscience is;
Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.
Thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use,
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
To mar the subject that before was well?
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
But my five wits nor my five senses can
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage;
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer
One blushing shame, another white despair;
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Is it thy will thy image should keep open
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
All men are bad, and in their badness reign.
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
That on himself such murderous shame commits.
And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
And steal dead seeing of his living hue?
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
That you are you, so dignifies his story,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother
She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
That you yourself may privilege your time
In the distraction of this madding fever!
Although she knows my days are past the best,
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest
Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time;
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
So all their praises are but prophecies
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue:
Which should example where your equal grew.
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
And situation with those dancing chips,
I love not less, though less the show appear:
In the old age black was not counted fair,
To work my mind, when body's work's expired:
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
For such a time do I now fortify
Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss
And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood;
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
How can I then be elder than thou art?
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
When forty winters shall beseige thy brow,
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
Triumph in love; flesh stays no father reason;
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Why should false painting imitate his cheek
The age to come would say 'This poet lies:
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
My reason, the physician to my love,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
And then believe me, my love is as fair
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land
Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
Lo! as a careful housewife runs to catch
Although I swear it to myself alone.
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
Harsh featureless and rude, barrenly perish:
Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'
Which by and by black night doth take away,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate'
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell:
Could make me any summer's story tell,
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all
Their images I loved I view in thee,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide?
What's new to speak, what new to register,
Doth part his function and is partly blind,
Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held:
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
'Fair, kind, and true,' have often lived alone,
Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say
They that have power to hurt and will do none,
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing:
To hideous winter and confounds him there;
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As the death-bed whereon it must expire
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
O, change thy thought, that I may change my mind!
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
And make Time's spoils despised every where.
And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
That poor retention could not so much hold,
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Find no determination: then you were
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Never believe, though in my nature reign'd
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
To win me soon to hell, my female evil
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
Beyond all date, even to eternity;
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
But then begins a journey in my head,
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
In whose confine immured is the store
My name be buried where my body is,
By self-example mayst thou be denied!
So is my love still telling what is told.
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Such civil war is in my love and hate
The worst was this; my love was my decay.
Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd;
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
Featured like him, like him with friends possess'd,
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word
To know my shames and praises from your tongue:
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
What old December's bareness every where!
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
How can it? O, how can Love's eye be true,
As high as learning my rude ignorance.
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
Die single, and thine image dies with thee.
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
Mine appetite I never more will grind
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
And this my hand against myself uprear,
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
So long lives this and this gives life to thee.
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
Desiring this man's art and that man's scope,
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;
Being your slave, what should I do but tend
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
But mutual render, only me for thee.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
That god forbid that made me first your slave,
Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
That I might see what the old world could say
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
And die as fast as they see others grow;
That I an accessary needs must be
I guess one angel in another's hell:
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
Thou gavest me thine, not to give back again.
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
If this be error and upon me proved,
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
O, that record could with a backward look,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
Who is it that says most? which can say more
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
That due to thee which thou deservest alone.
Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
And almost thence my nature is subdued
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
Either not assail'd or victor being charged;
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:
Was used in giving gentle doom,
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
For when these quicker elements are gone
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
And husband nature's riches from expense;
When I against myself with thee partake?
Beated and chopp'd with tann'd antiquity,
I was not sick of any fear from thence:
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
What merit do I in myself respect,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
Where Cupid got new fire--my mistress' eyes.
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
And age in love loves not to have years told:
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee
As every alien pen hath got my use
Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Proving his beauty by succession thine!
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Nor services to do, till you require.
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Like to the lark at break of day arising
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair:
The one by toil, the other to complain
For I impair not beauty being mute,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
When I have seen such interchange of state,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart.
And I will comment upon that offence;
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
To make some special instant special blest,
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so;
Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
these rebel powers that thee array;
But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost,
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
Creating every bad a perfect best,
Which alters when it alteration finds,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
They are the lords and owners of their faces,
For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
Her love for whose dear love I rise and fall.
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
And captive good attending captain ill:
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
No, it was builded far from accident;
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
He of tall building and of goodly pride:
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
Use power with power and slay me not by art.
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
As a decrepit father takes delight
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time,
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it;
But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,
For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind:
For no man well of such a salve can speak
Alas, 'tis true I have gone here and there
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
Before the bastard signs of fair were born,
To 'cide this title is impanneled
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
From his low tract and look another way:
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,
Within his bending sickle's compass come:
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out
Of their fair subject, blessing every book
But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse.
When most impeach'd stands least in thy control.
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
One will of mine, to make thy large 'Will' more.
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
And all those friends which I thought buried.
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.
But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured eye,
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
But ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
Why lovest thou that which thou receivest not gladly,
Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls:
Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
But these particulars are not my measure;
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.
'Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,
But found no cure: the bath for my help lies
Feed'st thy light'st flame with self-substantial fuel,
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
Until life's composition be recured
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Not wondering at the present nor the past,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
Then being ask'd where all thy beauty lies,
And fortify yourself in your decay
O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
Among a number one is reckon'd none:
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
To live a second life on second head;
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
By looking on thee in the living day,
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
You had a father: let your son say so.
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
From heaven to hell is flown away;
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
If any, be a satire to decay,
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,
Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.
Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell
How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
That thou consumest thyself in single life?
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
Ten times thyself were happier than thou art,
For through the painter must you see his skill,
Else call it winter, which being full of care
So, either by thy picture or my love,
If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
Thus policy in love, to anticipate
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
That having such a scope to show her pride,
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
From limits far remote where thou dost stay.
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
As easy might I from myself depart
Even for this let us divided live,
In so profound abysm I throw all care
That every tongue says beauty should look so.
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
To this I witness call the fools of time,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.
Nativity, once in the main of light,
For thee and for myself no quiet find.
To find where your true image pictured lies;
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
So thou through windows of thine age shall see
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear,
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
I all alone beweep my outcast state
For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
When I behold the violet past prime,
It fears not policy, that heretic,
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Although our undivided loves are one:
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
O, learn to read what silent love hath writ:
I must, each day say o'er the very same,
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Cheered and check'd even by the self-same sky,
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
Look, whom she best endow'd she gave the more;
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
No want of conscience hold it that I call
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
All these I better in one general best.
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:
O,'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
And guilded honour shamefully misplaced,
Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.
That follow'd it as gentle day
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,
As any she belied with false compare.
Ay me! but yet thou mightest my seat forbear,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days
In other accents do this praise confound
Is poorly imitated after you;
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
Why with the time do I not glance aside
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
You are so strongly in my purpose bred
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake?
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
So are those errors that in thee are seen
Without accusing you of injury.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
By praising him here who doth hence remain!
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
O benefit of ill! now I find true
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
Book both my wilfulness and errors down
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
Askance and strangely: but, by all above,
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
Why should my heart think that a several plot
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
You still shall live--such virtue hath my pen--
And by their verdict is determined
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those
Without this, folly, age and cold decay:
But were some child of yours alive that time,
Then others for the breath of words respect,
And by and by clean starved for a look;
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
What's in the brain that ink may character
Thy adverse party is thy advocate--
Let those whom Nature hath not made for store,
Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
When I consider every thing that grows
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
The world will be thy widow and still weep
Which husbandry in honour might uphold
To set a form upon desired change,
Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure;
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
In days long since, before these last so bad.
Even in the eyes of all posterity
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
When in the least of them my life hath end.
Making his style admired every where.
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art;
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
And each doth good turns now unto the other:
Incapable of more, replete with you,
My life, being made of four, with two alone
That is so proud thy service to despise,
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
Make thee another self, for love of me,
For having traffic with thyself alone,
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
And threescore year would make the world away.
Him in thy course untainted do allow
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized
This silence for my sin you did impute,
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
To every hymn that able spirit affords
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:
O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
As any mother's child, though not so bright
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
And my sick Muse doth give another place.
I summon up remembrance of things past,
But that so much of earth and water wrought
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
And so the general of hot desire
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
For then despite of space I would be brought,
if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
His tender heir might bear his memory:
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
In all external grace you have some part,
Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
But that thou none lovest is most evident;
But since he died and poets better prove,
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
O, what a happy title do I find,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
But flowers distill'd though they with winter meet,
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
Incertainties now crown themselves assured
The which he will not every hour survey,
My soul doth tell my body that he may
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
Then happy I, that love and am beloved
When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
XVIII.
If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.
O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Or state itself confounded to decay;
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain;
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury.
Points on me graciously with fair aspect
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
Against my love shall be, as I am now,
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
No news but health from their physicians know;
Let them say more than like of hearsay well;
Which prove more short than waste or ruining?
Our love was new and then but in the spring
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
If my dear love were but the child of state,
And rather make them born to our desire
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
'Fair, kind, and true' varying to other words;
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
Where time and outward form would show it dead.
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
O, call not me to justify the wrong
O'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might.
At first the very worst of fortune's might,
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
And in this change is my invention spent,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
Or being wreck'd, I am a worthless boat,
And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
Being had, to triumph, being lack'd, to hope.
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
Hearing you praised, I say ''Tis so, 'tis true,'
He learn'd but surety-like to write for me
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
So is it not with me as with that Muse
Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
Your love and pity doth the impression fill
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Then will I swear beauty herself is black
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste.
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame!
Others but stewards of their excellence.
That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire.
Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
That I have frequent been with unknown minds
Then if for my love thou my love receivest,
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
What merit lived in me, that you should love
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Than public means which public manners breeds.
My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
As interest of the dead, which now appear
And with his presence grace impiety,
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
That to my use it might unused stay
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
As with your shadow I with these did play:
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.
And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
But let your love even with my life decay,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
Finding the first conceit of love there bred
Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
To make of monsters and things indigest
Growing a bath and healthful remedy
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend
But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert;
Show me your image in some antique book,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.
And all my soul and all my every part;
That is my home of love: if I have ranged,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
Or bends with the remover to remove:
And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
Since why to love I can allege no cause.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim
Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die.
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
Making a couplement of proud compare,
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
And given grace a double majesty.
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
For to no other pass my verses tend
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Thyself away art resent still with me;
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time.
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Then, were not summer's distillation left,
The barren tender of a poet's debt;
To tie up envy evermore enlarged:
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
And given to time your own dear-purchased right
Looking on darkness which the blind do see
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep:
No love toward others in that bosom sits
And more, much more, than in my verse can sit
Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
And for a woman wert thou first created;
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
From you have I been absent in the spring,
Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,
'I hate' from hate away she threw,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee:
As on the finger of a throned queen
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
And many maiden gardens yet unset
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
Making no summer of another's green,
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Give warning to the world that I am fled
That did not better for my life provide
So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse
And strength by limping sway disabled,
So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
All losses are restored and sorrows end.
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
And being frank she lends to those are free.
Like him that travels I return again,
But heaven in thy creation did decree
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still:
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
Save, where you are how happy you make those.
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
O, none but unthrifts! Dear my love, you know
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
So far from variation or quick change?
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
O, lest the world should task you to recite
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
When my love swears that she is made of truth
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
FROM fairest creatures we desire increase,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
He, nor that affable familiar ghost
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found;
Which shall be most my glory, being dumb;
But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,
Sap check'd with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
But things removed that hidden in thee lie!
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
After my death, dear love, forget me quite,
For as the sun is daily new and old,
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny,
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express
That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
That Time will come and take my love away.
Save what is had or must from you be took.
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
For if I should despair, I should grow mad,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan:
Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
To witness duty, not to show my wit:
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
Whose influence is thine and born of thee:
And our dear love lose name of single one,
I never saw that you did painting need
But thence I learn, and find the lesson true,
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Have put on black and loving mourners be,
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
I tell the day, to please them thou art bright
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
And night doth nightly make grief's strengthseem stronger.
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
That censures falsely what they see aright?
That they behold, and see not what they see?
That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye
Now counting best to be with you alone,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
And stretched metre of an antique song:
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye
And for this sin there is no remedy,
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
But thou art all my art and dost advance
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
So I return rebuked to my content
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,'
The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.
And taught it thus anew to greet:
And found such fair assistance in my verse
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
No matter then although my foot did stand
Unless this general evil they maintain,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
If it be not, then love doth well denote
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,
So should my papers yellow'd with their age
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
Now all is done, have what shall have no end:
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
And all things turn to fair that eyes can see!
Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Call'd to that audit by advised respects;
In me thou seest the twilight of such day
My love is as a fever, longing still
Then lack'd I matter; that enfeebled mine.
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
That all the world besides methinks are dead.
The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part:
Though in our lives a separable spite,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
Who plead for love and look for recompense
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--
So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
Now with the drops of this most balmy time
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
When every private widow well may keep
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
I see a better state to me belongs
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake;
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
And found it in thy cheek; he can afford
O, what a mansion have those vices got
Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase:
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.
If there be nothing new, but that which is
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
And for myself mine own worth do define,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
Your own glass shows you when you look in it.
And my heart's right thy inward love of heart.
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
And perspective it is the painter's art.
So that eternal love in love's fresh case
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
When in eternal lines to time thou growest:
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
And their gross painting might be better used
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
The better angel is a man right fair,
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
O, know, sweet love, I always write of you,
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Look, what thy memory can not contain
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
That better is by evil still made better;
Like as, to make our appetites more keen,
Beauty o'ersnow'd and bareness every where:
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her;
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'
The living record of your memory.
Spending again what is already spent:
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
O, none, unless this miracle have might,
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
Let me confess that we two must be twain,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.'
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
But when she saw my woeful state,
Shall reasons find of settled gravity,--
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
And hang more praise upon deceased I
How careful was I, when I took my way,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
And I am still with them and they with thee;
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
But be contented: when that fell arrest
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
And, tender churl, makest waste in niggarding.
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
Within be fed, without be rich no more:
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'er-worn;
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
My life hath in this line some interest,
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
As truth and beauty shall together thrive,
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving
That due of many now is thine alone:
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd;
The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd
Making a famine where abundance lies,
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves
Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast
Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
O, how I faint when I of you do write,
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
The forward violet thus did I chide:
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are
Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
I see their antique pen would have express'd
At random from the truth vainly express'd;
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away,
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?
From me far off, with others all too near.
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm'd.
Without thy help by me be borne alone.
Which shall above that idle rank remain
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
And saved my life, saying 'not you.'
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
The constancy and virtue of your love.
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
Who will believe my verse in time to come,
For never-resting time leads summer on
The other as your bounty doth appear;
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
Of different flowers in odour and in hue
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
Her audit, though delay'd, answer'd must be,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
For thee against myself I'll vow debate,
You should live twice; in it and in my rhyme.
To what you will; to you it doth belong
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
That may express my love or thy dear merit?
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
The very part was consecrate to thee:
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
Ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scoped this sorrow,
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
When others would give life and bring a tomb.
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
Thy unused beauty must be tomb'd with thee,
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
But as the riper should by time decease,
The second burden of a former child!
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might:
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
From hence your memory death cannot take,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Bring me within the level of your frown,
Yourself again after yourself's decease,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,