Incertainties now crown themselves assured
For it depends upon that love of thine.
That thou consumest thyself in single life?
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
So should the lines of life that life repair,
My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,
She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
But that so much of earth and water wrought
Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
Our love was new and then but in the spring
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
From his low tract and look another way:
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
To keep an adjunct to remember thee
And situation with those dancing chips,
Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing
As I all other in all worths surmount.
That I have frequent been with unknown minds
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,
Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted,
Receiving nought by elements so slow
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
Or being wreck'd, I am a worthless boat,
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
To make him seem long hence as he shows now.
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
And our dear love lose name of single one,
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
Like him that travels I return again,
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
That I in thy abundance am sufficed
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
And I will comment upon that offence;
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
It fears not policy, that heretic,
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Or else receivest with pleasure thine annoy?
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.
And therefore have I slept in your report,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made:
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
Since all alike my songs and praises be
And then believe me, my love is as fair
In process of the seasons have I seen,
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd'
All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
And age in love loves not to have years told:
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
And night doth nightly make grief's strengthseem stronger.
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
Which husbandry in honour might uphold
Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
But were some child of yours alive that time,
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame!
As interest of the dead, which now appear
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
But if that flower with base infection meet,
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Which by and by black night doth take away,
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
