For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse.
The injuries that to myself I do,
Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
With my extern the outward honouring,
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
And all those friends which I thought buried.
It is the star to every wandering bark,
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
Within his bending sickle's compass come:
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
But these particulars are not my measure;
Than think that we before have heard them told.
And die as fast as they see others grow;
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.
But let your love even with my life decay,
For why should others false adulterate eyes
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie!
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
The sea all water, yet receives rain still
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
Give warning to the world that I am fled
To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
In all external grace you have some part,
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd
For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
Find no determination: then you were
So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
Receiving nought by elements so slow
And keep invention in a noted weed,
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave
