Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
And kept unused, the user so destroys it.
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
Thy unused beauty must be tomb'd with thee,
From heaven to hell is flown away;
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
Yourself again after yourself's decease,
Which three till now never kept seat in one.
I grant I never saw a goddess go;
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
O, from what power hast thou this powerful might
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
So, either by thy picture or my love,
As every alien pen hath got my use
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
When I behold the violet past prime,
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast
But that so much of earth and water wrought
Is it thy will thy image should keep open
Before the bastard signs of fair were born,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
That follow'd it as gentle day
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
That you are you, so dignifies his story,
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force,
And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove
Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
The dedicated words which writers use
Thou, best of dearest and mine only care,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say
Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
Save, where you are how happy you make those.
To 'cide this title is impanneled
And for that riches where is my deserving?
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly
Since all alike my songs and praises be
Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:
O, that our night of woe might have remember'd
Sets down her babe and makes an swift dispatch
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
Doth follow night, who like a fiend
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
In many's looks the false heart's history
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will,'
If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
Then others for the breath of words respect,
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
The age to come would say 'This poet lies:
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
And situation with those dancing chips,
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb
And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
When I was certain o'er incertainty,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
When I do count the clock that tells the time,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me;
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
For since each hand hath put on nature's power,
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
So true a fool is love that in your will,
I must attend time's leisure with my moan,
Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
And wear their brave state out of memory;
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.
In the old age black was not counted fair,
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
Yet, do thy worst, old Time: despite thy wrong,
Whose influence is thine and born of thee:
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence
Excuse not silence so; for't lies in thee
For all the day they view things unrespected;
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
O' let me, true in love, but truly write,
Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
So should the lines of life that life repair,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
If it be not, then love doth well denote
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
The little Love-god lying once asleep
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
Feed'st thy light'st flame with self-substantial fuel,
Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth
To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide?
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
Full character'd with lasting memory,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
Where time and outward form would show it dead.
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Come daily to the banks, that, when they see
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire.
The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part:
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
Being had, to triumph, being lack'd, to hope.
Either not assail'd or victor being charged;
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,
As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time,
Even so my sun one early morn did shine
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
Although I swear it to myself alone.
And given grace a double majesty.
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
Or made them swear against the thing they see;
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind:
But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
But be contented: when that fell arrest
From his low tract and look another way:
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
I see their antique pen would have express'd
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay,
Even for this let us divided live,
That on himself such murderous shame commits.
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
As victors of my silence cannot boast;
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.
With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase:
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
O, lest your true love may seem false in this,
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days
Without all ornament, itself and true,
That he shall never cut from memory
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.
And by a part of all thy glory live.
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
As on the finger of a throned queen
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
That they behold, and see not what they see?
If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
And taught it thus anew to greet:
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
Love is too young to know what conscience is;
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
Which should example where your equal grew.
Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
But when she saw my woeful state,
Incertainties now crown themselves assured
Each changing place with that which goes before,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert;
O, learn to read what silent love hath writ:
This I do vow and this shall ever be;
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;
To this I witness call the fools of time,
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
To truths translated and for true things deem'd.
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all
Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
What's in the brain that ink may character
Your love and pity doth the impression fill
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell:
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
And by their verdict is determined
He of tall building and of goodly pride:
Save what is had or must from you be took.
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Calls back the lovely April of her prime:
Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
And, tender churl, makest waste in niggarding.
And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
That do not do the thing they most do show,
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
To this composed wonder of your frame;
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.
Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks
The better angel is a man right fair,
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
Then will I swear beauty herself is black
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
Than public means which public manners breeds.
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
For, thou betraying me, I do betray
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep:
In all external grace you have some part,
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted,
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
O, let me suffer, being at your beck,
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
Then look I death my days should expiate.
And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
That thou consumest thyself in single life?
Such civil war is in my love and hate
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;
Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long
Thy adverse party is thy advocate--
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
As interest of the dead, which now appear
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
Thyself away art resent still with me;
Since, seldom coming, in the long year set,
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,
The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
By self-example mayst thou be denied!
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
And so the general of hot desire
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
To be so tickled, they would change their state
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd;
I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit;
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
At random from the truth vainly express'd;
Without thy help by me be borne alone.
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
That may express my love or thy dear merit?
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.
And brought to medicine a healthful state
But now is black beauty's successive heir,
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
I love not less, though less the show appear:
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
That god forbid that made me first your slave,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
But the defendant doth that plea deny
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
As any she belied with false compare.
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Beyond all date, even to eternity;
The very part was consecrate to thee:
Which alters when it alteration finds,
To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,
To march in ranks of better equipage:
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,
Much steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Injurious distance should not stop my way;
At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
Who with his fear is put besides his part,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it;
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest.
Than think that we before have heard them told.
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;
Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck;
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
Which, used, lives th' executor to be.
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
Of their fair subject, blessing every book
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
No love toward others in that bosom sits
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:
And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
In me thou seest the twilight of such day
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
Being your slave, what should I do but tend
Even such a beauty as you master now.
No, I am that I am, and they that level
Points on me graciously with fair aspect
Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
But mutual render, only me for thee.
And all in war with Time for love of you,
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
In other accents do this praise confound
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,
Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost,
Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
How like a winter hath my absence been
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
No matter then although my foot did stand
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
As an unperfect actor on the stage
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
That to my use it might unused stay
In our two loves there is but one respect,
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;
But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
Without accusing you of injury.
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
When love, converted from the thing it was,
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
As a decrepit father takes delight
My soul doth tell my body that he may
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
But ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
Fairing the foul with art's false borrow'd face,
That I might see what the old world could say
Or laid great bases for eternity,
ow can I then return in happy plight,
So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
Within his bending sickle's compass come:
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
The forward violet thus did I chide:
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
I guess one angel in another's hell:
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
This were to be new made when thou art old,
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-kill'd.
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
The fairest votary took up that fire
But, for their virtue only is their show,
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
O, how I faint when I of you do write,
But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
But these particulars are not my measure;
As soon as think the place where he would be.
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
To mar the subject that before was well?
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
When not to be receives reproach of being,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
You are so strongly in my purpose bred
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
The argument all bare is of more worth
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle, hour;
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
But now my gracious numbers are decay'd
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;
So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
Lest the wise world should look into your moan
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
The world will be thy widow and still weep
No longer yours than you yourself here live:
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
You had a father: let your son say so.
Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
For having traffic with thyself alone,
For as the sun is daily new and old,
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
What means the world to say it is not so?
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?
He lends thee virtue and he stole that word
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves
If all were minded so, the times should cease
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
And given to time your own dear-purchased right
Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,
To swear against the truth so foul a lie!
But being both from me, both to each friend,
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
'Will' will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
And found such fair assistance in my verse
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
Then happy I, that love and am beloved
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
So that eternal love in love's fresh case
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was:
Till I return, of posting is no need.
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,'
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
As any mother's child, though not so bright
Thou gavest me thine, not to give back again.
To me that languish'd for her sake;
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
And threescore year would make the world away.
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother
Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
Than when it hath my added praise beside!
All losses are restored and sorrows end.
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
For if it see the rudest or gentlest sight,
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held:
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
It fears not policy, that heretic,
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
And made myself a motley to the view,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,
The living record of your memory.
Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
So is my love still telling what is told.
That is so proud thy service to despise,
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
Making his style admired every where.
And saved my life, saying 'not you.'
I have no precious time at all to spend,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
Proving his beauty by succession thine!
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Bring me within the level of your frown,
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
So should my papers yellow'd with their age
And tongues to be your being shall rehearse
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
All days are nights to see till I see thee,
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair:
Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
For to no other pass my verses tend
And mock you with me after I am gone.
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
So far from variation or quick change?
And you in every blessed shape we know.
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
What merit lived in me, that you should love
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes,
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
O, love's best habit is in seeming trust,
And husband nature's riches from expense;
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured eye,
Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st,
Doth half that glory to the sober west,
O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are
And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
And therefore art enforced to seek anew
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
To hideous winter and confounds him there;
They that have power to hurt and will do none,
The second burden of a former child!
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:
For thou art covetous and he is kind;
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
The barren tender of a poet's debt;
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
ord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
Make thee another self, for love of me,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
Others but stewards of their excellence.
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Without this, folly, age and cold decay:
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
And sable curls all silver'd o'er with white;
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,
When day's oppression is not eased by night,
O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
So long lives this and this gives life to thee.
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
To follow that which flies before her face,
Although our undivided loves are one:
Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time;
And that which governs me to go about
And in my madness might speak ill of thee:
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
All these I better in one general best.
O, though I love what others do abhor,
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
But then begins a journey in my head,
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,
Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;
And being frank she lends to those are free.
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
Will play the tyrants to the very same
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
That censures falsely what they see aright?
All men are bad, and in their badness reign.
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
And therefore to your fair no painting set;
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Then, were not summer's distillation left,
Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.
By praising him here who doth hence remain!
A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
After a thousand victories once foil'd,
The worth of that is that which it contains,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,
Against that time, if ever that time come,
For I impair not beauty being mute,
For nothing this wide universe I call,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
This silence for my sin you did impute,
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood;
Attending on his golden pilgrimage;
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
Within thine own bud buriest thy content
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
Like to the lark at break of day arising
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
Then you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.'
And broils root out the work of masonry,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.
Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
Their images I loved I view in thee,
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
One blushing shame, another white despair;
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
O, what a happy title do I find,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
Let those who are in favour with their stars
In winged speed no motion shall I know:
Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
With what I most enjoy contented least;
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye
And in abundance addeth to his store;
And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd
So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
Had eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
And to the most of praise add something more;
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
I never saw that you did painting need
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
And age in love loves not to have years told:
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
I must, each day say o'er the very same,
