Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:
The very part was consecrate to thee:
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
To this composed wonder of your frame;
Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify.
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
All losses are restored and sorrows end.
No want of conscience hold it that I call
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
And sable curls all silver'd o'er with white;
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies' force,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
That to my use it might unused stay
Feed'st thy light'st flame with self-substantial fuel,
Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,
Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.
Most true it is that I have look'd on truth
And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
Let them say more than like of hearsay well;
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
I send them back again and straight grow sad.
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
Most worthy of comfort, now my greatest grief,
For to no other pass my verses tend
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
O, how I faint when I of you do write,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
Resembling sire and child and happy mother
Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows
This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul
Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held:
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
Nay, if you read this line, remember not
For having traffic with thyself alone,
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away,
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Made old offences of affections new;
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured
At first the very worst of fortune's might,
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.
'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
But thou art all my art and dost advance
In winged speed no motion shall I know:
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
To thee I send this written embassage,
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;
That sin by him advantage should achieve
Possessing or pursuing no delight,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:
When forty winters shall beseige thy brow,
Than both your poets can in praise devise.
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Pity me then and wish I were renew'd;
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand,
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;
To find where your true image pictured lies;
So that myself bring water for my stain.
O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend
But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
And make Time's spoils despised every where.
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
When others would give life and bring a tomb.
Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st;
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,
I love not less, though less the show appear:
So am I as the rich, whose blessed key
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
O benefit of ill! now I find true
Full many a glorious morning have I seen
And they shall live, and he in them still green.
That she that makes me sin awards me pain.
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving
From his low tract and look another way:
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
No longer yours than you yourself here live:
Featured like him, like him with friends possess'd,
That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
No shape so true, no truth of such account;
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
Making a famine where abundance lies,
O, let my books be then the eloquence
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
Who will believe my verse in time to come,
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
When I consider every thing that grows
Return of love, more blest may be the view;
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
Beauty o'ersnow'd and bareness every where:
And her quietus is to render thee.
For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,
That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire.
One on another's neck, do witness bear
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair:
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart.
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more
Such civil war is in my love and hate
But were some child of yours alive that time,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:
Askance and strangely: but, by all above,
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
And I am still with them and they with thee;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
Nativity, once in the main of light,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Without thy help by me be borne alone.
Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
But being both from me, both to each friend,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.
O, lest the world should task you to recite
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
And with his presence grace impiety,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
Making no summer of another's green,
Incapable of more, replete with you,
This wish I have; then ten times happy me!
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,
In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
Unlook'd on diest, unless thou get a son.
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
Their images I loved I view in thee,
May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
To me that languish'd for her sake;
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;
When in the least of them my life hath end.
But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Against confounding age's cruel knife,
And do so, love; yet when they have devised
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
Against that time do I ensconce me here
That every word doth almost tell my name,
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
Then happy I, that love and am beloved
Give warning to the world that I am fled
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
Slandering creation with a false esteem:
If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
For thee and for myself no quiet find.
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
To give full growth to that which still doth grow?
Crooked elipses 'gainst his glory fight,
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
Against that time, if ever that time come,
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare
All these I better in one general best.
Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,
Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.
Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
And husband nature's riches from expense;
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
They live unwoo'd and unrespected fade,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
To tie up envy evermore enlarged:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
Were to import forgetfulness in me.
As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
No matter then although my foot did stand
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
With all triumphant splendor on my brow;
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
And lace itself with his society?
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
My love is as a fever, longing still
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
As soon as think the place where he would be.
Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Look, what thy memory can not contain
Whose influence is thine and born of thee:
So shall those blots that do with me remain
That he shall never cut from memory
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense--
What means the world to say it is not so?
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
At my abuses reckon up their own:
In things of great receipt with ease we prove
Or bends with the remover to remove:
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
For all the day they view things unrespected;
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Incertainties now crown themselves assured
Which by and by black night doth take away,
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
And by a part of all thy glory live.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind:
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
Full character'd with lasting memory,
How careful was I, when I took my way,
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Looking on darkness which the blind do see
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
For such a time do I now fortify
With my extern the outward honouring,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
For that sweet odour which doth in it live.
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
From me far off, with others all too near.
And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief
Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
How heavy do I journey on the way,
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
The little Love-god lying once asleep
Like to the lark at break of day arising
But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
To live a second life on second head;
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Then of thy beauty do I question make,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
For she hath no excheckr now but his,
Love is a babe; then might I not say so,
But weep to have that which it fears to lose.
Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,
Who with his fear is put besides his part,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
And, to be sure that is not false I swear,
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
And mock you with me after I am gone.
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might:
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary
Without accusing you of injury.
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
When thou art all the better part of me?
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
The other two, slight air and purging fire,
The fairest votary took up that fire
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
In whose confine immured is the store
Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:
The hand that writ it; for I love you so
'Fair, kind and true' is all my argument,
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus;
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love.'
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Why with the time do I not glance aside
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
My love shall in my verse ever live young.
Could make me any summer's story tell,
The worth of that is that which it contains,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight
And suit thy pity like in every part.
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
How many a holy and obsequious tear
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.
Making his style admired every where.
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
For why should others false adulterate eyes
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
But let your love even with my life decay,
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
