Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
And fortify yourself in your decay
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
That they behold, and see not what they see?
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
And when a woman woos, what woman's son
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
To say they err I dare not be so bold,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
So are those errors that in thee are seen
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
That's for thyself to breed another thee,
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,
And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in overplus;
The sea all water, yet receives rain still
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
That all the world besides methinks are dead.
Though in thy stores' account I one must be;
And night doth nightly make grief's strengthseem stronger.
Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
By looking on thee in the living day,
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
O, none, unless this miracle have might,
Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love
Which prove more short than waste or ruining?
O'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might.
Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,
For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue:
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
That music hath a far more pleasing sound;
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
Compare them with the bettering of the time,
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
Against thy reasons making no defence.
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
And do so, love; yet when they have devised
And guilded honour shamefully misplaced,
Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.
Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
Why lovest thou that which thou receivest not gladly,
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
Therefore I lie with her and she with me,
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;
But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
But do not so; I love thee in such sort
The worth of that is that which it contains,
And folly doctor-like controlling skill,
And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
Now proud as an enjoyer and anon
Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
Against my love shall be, as I am now,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
If my slight Muse do please these curious days,
That poor retention could not so much hold,
My most true mind thus makes mine eye untrue.
And broils root out the work of masonry,
O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
For that sweet odour which doth in it live.
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
At random from the truth vainly express'd;
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
To work my mind, when body's work's expired:
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection
But reckoning time, whose million'd accidents
Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Give warning to the world that I am fled
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
From limits far remote where thou dost stay.
Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
So true a fool is love that in your will,
From his low tract and look another way:
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her;
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
Thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
But when my glass shows me myself indeed,
Than public means which public manners breeds.
To this composed wonder of your frame;
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
O, blame me not, if I no more can write!
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Were 't aught to me I bore the canopy,
And each, though enemies to either's reign,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
As every alien pen hath got my use
Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
Could make me any summer's story tell,
Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly
And that is this, and this with thee remains.
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
In all external grace you have some part,
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,
And in some perfumes is there more delight
Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost,
But not to tell of good or evil luck,
As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
So all their praises are but prophecies
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,
This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,
Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
O, that record could with a backward look,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
To give away yourself keeps yourself still,
And, thou away, the very birds are mute;
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And with his presence grace impiety,
Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate'
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
And hang more praise upon deceased I
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
And perspective it is the painter's art.
That time of year thou mayst in me behold
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-kill'd.
Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
But you like none, none you, for constant heart.
For thy records and what we see doth lie,
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?
Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Who is it that says most? which can say more
That having such a scope to show her pride,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Against that time, if ever that time come,
No want of conscience hold it that I call
If I could write the beauty of your eyes
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
The which he will not every hour survey,
Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold
I never saw that you did painting need
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste.
Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
Now is the time that face should form another;
For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,
O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are
Why should my heart think that a several plot
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
When I break twenty? I am perjured most;
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
For why should others false adulterate eyes
The injuries that to myself I do,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
Have added feathers to the learned's wing
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
When every private widow well may keep
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
Each changing place with that which goes before,
Then others for the breath of words respect,
That better is by evil still made better;
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken;
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
Who all their parts of me to thee did give;
Those petty wrongs that liberty commits,
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?
Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend
For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
From you have I been absent in the spring,
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
But found no cure: the bath for my help lies
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
Full character'd with lasting memory,
My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
Will play the tyrants to the very same
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
these rebel powers that thee array;
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized
Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
That to his subject lends not some small glory;
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
And that which governs me to go about
But flowers distill'd though they with winter meet,
O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,
Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue
No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
Thou canst not then use rigor in my gaol:
And in this change is my invention spent,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Yourself again after yourself's decease,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
But best is best, if never intermix'd?'
When thou art all the better part of me?
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Be scorn'd like old men of less truth than tongue,
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
And age in love loves not to have years told:
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
My life, being made of four, with two alone
Growing a bath and healthful remedy
Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
And in my madness might speak ill of thee:
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,
No, I am that I am, and they that level
Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.
Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong
As a decrepit father takes delight
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
O, sure I am, the wits of former days
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd
As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
O, how I faint when I of you do write,
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
And on just proof surmise accumulate;
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both
And for that riches where is my deserving?
Incertainties now crown themselves assured
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy?
And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie--
And I will comment upon that offence;
But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured
Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,'
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured
Then, were not summer's distillation left,
How like a winter hath my absence been
And die as fast as they see others grow;
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
That I have frequent been with unknown minds
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
And all those friends which I thought buried.
Which husbandry in honour might uphold
Than that which on thy humour doth depend;
And, for they look'd but with divining eyes,
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
And like unletter'd clerk still cry 'Amen'
Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
Slandering creation with a false esteem:
And all things turn to fair that eyes can see!
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls:
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
At my abuses reckon up their own:
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
O, never say that I was false of heart,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
But day by night, and night by day, oppress'd?
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart.
And all in war with Time for love of you,
Love's eye is not so true as all men's 'No.'
For all that beauty that doth cover thee
By oft predict that I in heaven find:
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;
A man in hue, all 'hues' in his controlling,
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
How heavy do I journey on the way,
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
But as the riper should by time decease,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
And, constant stars, in them I read such art
To set a form upon desired change,
And strength by limping sway disabled,
Which should example where your equal grew.
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,
When my love swears that she is made of truth
Upon thy side against myself I'll fight,
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see
Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
And yet this time removed was summer's time,
And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
Receiving nought by elements so slow
O, carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
Within be fed, without be rich no more:
Sings this to thee: 'thou single wilt prove none.'
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
Either not assail'd or victor being charged;
Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
Look, whom she best endow'd she gave the more;
So long as youth and thou are of one date;
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
With virtuous wish would bear your living flowers,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
Die single, and thine image dies with thee.
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
Without all bail shall carry me away,
But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
All this away and me most wretched make.
What means the world to say it is not so?
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
Then happy I, that love and am beloved
And lace itself with his society?
And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
Of their fair subject, blessing every book
Of different flowers in odour and in hue
Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.
Looking on darkness which the blind do see
O,'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
